AIRQUAKE 1.00 (11/9/1997)
by Iikka Ker„nen
ikeranen@raita.oulu.fi
http://www.planetquake.com/ikq/airquake.htm

Help wanted! See "contributing" section. Especially I need LEVELS. Everything
else is basically done already...

This is a "total conversion" with players replaced by fighter planes and
other military vehicles, and monsters replaced by similar vehicles or ground
artillery. Since this also means all the maps need to be done specifically
for AirQuake, it is a very total conversion indeed.

This is not trying to be a hard-core realistic simulator, rather than a 3d
action game with some simulator-like features. The controls etc are very
simple, as you'll see. This doesn't mean the enemies are easy to kill though.
They have as good weapons as you...

**WHAT'S NEW (since test 25)

- I put the number 1.00 at the top. This is because the TC is not changing
  a lot anymore. I will probably release 1.01 and 1.02 if I find bugs to
  fix, but otherwise it's just short of levels. I'll do more levels and
  maybe release them separately to reduce download times. (Same for revised
  versions of air2-3 and aircity)
- Thus, the levels have been removed from this pack. Download the level
  pack separately if this is your first download of AirQuake.
- Added different armour types to units. Now the vulcan is not that useful
  against tanks (in DM), yet it still kills humvees quickly. In single player
  the enemies haven't been added armour for playability reasons.
- Added remote server admin menu. You can set up a password on the command
  line and then in the game type it in and /kick other players. :-)
- Added SPEECH. See the first demo. The speech samples are made by Fullmoon
  Maddness crew, as is the airsay.rc that is used for controlling the voice
  (and text) messages. (Read airsay.txt)
- The radars shouldn't stick into targets like sometimes before...
- A-10's GAU cannon fire rate upped.
- Plasma explosion colour changed.
- AI Tanks don't chase air enemies anymore if they have a moving path...
- Added strafe/roll buttons and bound them to A and D. (left/right look are
  not bound anymore, yet they still exist). Strafe buttons are not recommended
  in deathmatch, Quake doesn't like press-and-hold buttons.
- Probably some other changes I can't remember.

**INSTALLING & RUNNING

- Install the patch to a subdirectory under the main Quake directory; for
  example, unzip it into quake\airquake\ with full pathnames. With Pkunzip,
  the parameter -d adds the full pathnames. (subdirectories included)
- Run Quake by typing "quake -game airquake". Then type into console:
  "map air1", "map air2", "map air3" or "map aircity" to get into the levels.
  I have included 3 demos. Just run Quake with "-game airquake" and wait
  till the demos start...
- To play in Internet, run "q95 -game airquake" or "winquake -game airquake"
  (or whatever you have in Linux etc). Then in the main menu, select
  Multiplayer/Join Game/TCP-IP, and type the server address in the box below.
  If the port of the server is not 26000, type the port number in the other
  box (in the upper part of the screen).

  See RULES section below for DM settings etc.

GLQUAKE

  Get the newest GLQuake to make AirQuake run at acceptable speed. Here are
  instructions to speed it up (from Adam Haun.. thanks):

  "First of all, set gl_subdivide_size to 4096. Set gl_polyblend to 0. Set
  gl_flashblend to 1. This improves speed enormously. The only problem is
  that on levels with an especially long viewing range(air3) there is a
  Hall of Mirrors-like effect at the extreme end of your vision."

  When installing a new version of AirQuake with possibly changed models,
  ALWAYS delete the glquake directory where it stores mesh files. Otherwise
  it would mess up all changed models by mixing them to the old versions.

**PLAYING

  This section tells you how to play with the included autoexec.cfg, that
  has all the necessary controls bound to mouse and keyboard.

QUICK START

  Here is a simple example of a flight in AirQuake. By following these
instructions, you can bomb the enemy radar base in Air3. The third demo
shows this flight in action, so sit down and watch it if you didn't
understand something...

After running Quake -game airquake, type "map air3" into console to start
the level. Press 3 to select the stealth fighter, then press mouse button
to start.

Now you find yourself in a stealth fighter parked on the front deck of an
aircraft carrier. Take-off clearance is asked automatically.

Press 8 to start your engines. Drive to the start of the runway and turn
right. Press 8 repeatedly to speed up, and look a little upward to take off
at the end of the runway. Feel the amazing freedom of flight. ;-)

Keep climbing up till you hit the ceiling. Turn around while climbing to
remain inside friendly area. You can ignore the few incoming enemies,
your carrier has enough defenses to take them out.

When you are at high altitude enough, turn towards the enemy radar base
(You see three white objects atop a hill near the coast). Press 3 to
select the Paveway bomb. Press and hold right mouse button to see the bomb
sight, and hold W key pressed to fly straight while aiming. Look with the
mouse so that the red box is exactly centered to the radar base, and press
left mouse button to release the bomb.

Release the right mouse button (to get back to stealth mode) and W, and
turn away. If you want, you can now press and hold W again, and press 9 to
see where your bomb goes. If it doesn't hit, try again.

When the radar base has been destroyed, or if you run out of ammo, you have
to land. Press 7 to reduce throttle to 75%, dive to low altitude and circle
around until your speed slows down. Approach the carrier's rear aligned to
the runway, and come down in about 10 degrees angle. Right before the touch-
down, reduce throttle to zero by pressing 7 repeatedly. If it seems you won't
stop quickly enough, speed up with key 8 and take off (to try again).

When stopped on the runway, set about 25% throttle and drive to the repair
spot under the bridge to rearm.

CONTROLS

- Steer your vehicle with mouse, or turning keys and look up/down. Vehicles
  don't turn instantly, but at speed depending on the vehicle type. Basically
  you tell the pilot or driver where to go by looking somewhere, and he just
  follows these orders.
- Tilting a helicopter up or down makes it move backward or forward.
- Press right mouse button (+jump) to use the special ability of your vehicle.
  This may for example turn on afterburner, or open stealth fighter's weapon
  bay doors. Helicopters and ground vehicles move to where you are looking,
  when you press special. For example, if you look back and press this
  button, your tank reverses. Hovercraft only goes forwards.
- All vehicles have throttle settings. Press 7 to decrease, and 8 to increase
  throttle. With helicopters and hover, this is used for moving up and down.
- Aircraft have additional left/right movement keys. Press:
  A (+extraleft)   to strafe/roll left. (helicopter/plane)
  D (+extraright)  to strafe/roll right.
- Change views by pressing:
  W (bound to +freelook) to freely look around with mouse. The vehicle's
    direction is "locked" and it goes straight while you press this key.
    Helicopter stops moving unless you press special key to move it.
    Release the key to return the controls. Freelook is good for locking
    missiles to targets in any direction with some planes, as well as for
    turning tank's turret while going straight, and landing with a chopper.
    (+lookleft) to look left. Release to return to the normal front view.
  S (+lookback) to look back.
    (+lookright) to look right.
  Z (+cczoomin) to zoom in.
  X (+cczoomout) to zoom out.
  Q (liftcam) to move camera up. Cycles through 5 positions. I added this as
    the hummer is hard to see in the default camera position. :)
  E (lockturret) is not actually a camera option, but somewhat related, as
    it's mostly used for taking screenshots. :) Basically it locks the turret
    to the current direction and then you can see it from front... I've found
    a practical use for this too: In AIRCITY, lock your tank guns upward, then
    use freelook and a lot of zoom out to watch where your cannon shells
    land. This way you can guard those bridges from your own base... Also,
    if you are using a ground vehicle, you can press E to lock your turret
    into an enemy (if you have a missile lock into it). It then follows the
    enemy automatically if possible.
  9 (impulse 9) toggles missile view. Usable for the hummer's bomb...
- Press number keys to select weapons. More about them in Vehicles section.
- Commands "cycleweapon" and "cycleweapon2" work like the cycle command in
  normal Quake... I'm not using them so they aren't bound to any keys. Bind
  them yourself. 
- Number 5 drops a flare (or shoots upward if a ground vehicle), that has
  50% chance to get missiles out of your tail.
- Press number 6 to set weapon model (big/small/none). The small version is
  mostly for high resolutions and GLquake, it's too small in 320x200.
- Before each respawn (while dead), you can select vehicles with the numbers.
- You can also switch your skin by typing "impulse 15" into console between
  respawns. Currently there's an alternate skin for dogfighter only.
- When you are stopped at rearm/repair spot with 100% health, you can
  re-select your vehicle by pressing 0 (impulse 10), and then vehicle number.
- When you're dead, you can switch teams in teamplay DM by selecting a new
  colour. Type into console "color 2" for blue, and "color 7" for red team.
  Don't do this when you're alive, or the game doesn't recognize the team
  change. (It should force the colours back to that of your team, but it has
  problems on dedicated servers)
- All the weapons except bombs auto-aim into ground targets, and homing
  missiles can be locked into planes as well. Slow missiles like mavericks
  aren't too good in shooting planes though.
- The red targeting box shows the direction where you are flying/shooting,
  except in the stealth mode.
- When the targeting box changes to different shape and moves on a target,
  you have gained a weapon lock. 
- The drone planes fly around following their routes. At first, they don't
  use afterburner, but if they take some damage, they start to use it...
  They have no AI yet, but I'm going to make some.
- The enemy helicopters have (almost) finished AI, they can really hunt you
  down and kill. They have a bit limited aiming skills for now though. 
- You can land on a special runway brush. Simply fly above it and reduce
  throttle, if you're in a helicopter... With planes, come down as slowly
  as possible, and don't turn at the moment when you touch the ground.
  Landing or taxiing outside a runway kills you. (Ground vehicles can of
  course travel anywhere on the ground)
- Ground vehicles can travel in shallow water without any problems. If they
  become (almost) completely submerged, they start to get heavy damage. The
  tank may survive for 10 seconds... Humvee can now drive underwater for
  about 10 seconds without getting any damage, but then it dies quickly...
  Only use this ability to cross rivers and such. (The friction between tires
  and sea floor is sometimes zero, and you get bad problems if you drive too
  long submerged..)

Radio Communications:

There are many radio messages in the airsay.rc. They are only sent to the
players of your team in teamplay DM, so you can communicate relatively safe.
Read the airsay.txt and examine airsay.rc to find more info about impulses
etc... Basically, everything is bound to keys F1-F8, and pressing F1 shows
you what the others do.

RULES

  This section contains descriptions for different game modes of AirQuake.

- Single player and Co-op game modes work like usual. (Except there are no
  many co-op starts in the levels, so you may get "telefrag" problems. Move
  away after starting)
- All monsters are now removed from deathmatch mode, EXCEPT if you have
  teamplay on, and the monsters belong in either team. (Defense turrets)
- Teamplay 1 turns on the team rules:
  * When a new player connects, he joins the team with least players.
  * Players always respawn at their own base.
  * Before respawns, you can change your team if you want. Please don't use
    this excessively, other players might not like it. Simply change your
    color to join another team. ("color 2" in console for blue, 7 for red)
  * Killing a teammate lowers your frag count.
  * Certain maps may contain people ("enemy officers") you can pick up. Bring
    them to an officer of your team to gain 10 frags, and 5 frags to other
    players in your team. (In aircity, the officers are at the bases)
  * Maps may also contain enemy buildings to be destroyed for frags in a
    similar way. Destroying your own buildings reduces your frags. There are
    buildings like this in Air2 and Air3.
- Almost forgot to tell... You do get 3 frag points for each kill. I did this
  because in AirQuake it's very easy to kill yourself. Now people sometimes
  have positive frags...

SERVER

  Here are some server options that are set by console variables.

Variable "temp1": Type "temp1 <number>" to set these options. Add numbers
together to use many options. "temp1 15" would turn on all the options below.
  1: Double weapons.
  2: Remove targeting box.
  4: Remove bright light effect from afterburners. RECOMMENDED FOR GL USERS!
  8: Prevent locking weapons into friendly targets.

Variable "noexit": This is no more used to prevent exiting from level, but
for level cycling on servers. Set noexit to the number of levels, and put
config files map00.cfg - mapNN.cfg in the airquake directory. These cfg files
contain line "changelevel mapname".

If you want to enable remote server options, get a password number with 6
digits, multiple it by 256 and add to the noexit. In the game, type "impulse
99" and then type the password by number keys (impulse 1-10). It must be
6 digits, for example "000245"... This brings you to the admin menu which is
controlled by numbers in the same way. For example, press 1 for kick command,
then 07 to kick 7th player. Some commands take 3 digits (frag/timelimit).
Press 9 to quit from admin menu. Once you have been there, you can always get
back by impulse 99 without the password. (Warning: you can get strange
results with passwords above 131071, apparently Quake uses 25-bit numbers..)

An example command line:

(divided on several lines for easier reading..)
Quake -dedicated 16
      -game airquake
      +deathmatch 1
      +noexit 28444420       [ 256*111111 + 4 ]
      +timelimit 30
      +map air1

This uses files map00.cfg to map03.cfg to set up a regular deathmatch game
that cycles through 4 levels, playing for 30 minutes in each. These .cfg
files are included, they cycle all the four levels. The .cfg files may also
contain commands to switch on/off teamplay, change timelimits etc. The
admin password in this example is 111111.

VEHICLES

  There are SIX different aircraft and FOUR ground vehicles. When the game
starts, you can select which one to use, unless set otherwise in the map
file. The vehicles have many different features, and they have different
roles in the game in team play... Now, to the specs:

Vehicle 1: Dogfighter

  This plane is an air superiority fighter, with weapons for little more than
air-to-air battles. Relatively fast, and can outturn almost anything.
  Speed:
  0.9 mach, with afterburner: 1.5 mach.
  Weapons:
  1: Vulcan cannon (AA). Ammo: 200
  2: 37mm Rockets (AA/AS). Rapid fire. Ammo: 10
  3: Sidewinder missiles (AA), speed 2.4 mach. Moderate damage. Ammo: 4
  4: AMRAAM missiles (AA), speed 3 mach. Long range, Good damage. Ammo: 4
  Health: 200
  Armour: 0

Vehicle 2: Fighter Bomber

  This is a ground assault fighter, with weapons for both air-to-air and
air-to-surface missions. As it's a lot heavier than the dogfighter, its
turning ability and speed are not as good. To compensate this problem, the
plane is equipped with a high-tech look-it-shoot-it helm sight... However,
it doesn't help that much if the enemy is behind you. Try to shoot from
distance and avoid real dogfights.
  Speed:
  0.85 mach, with afterburner: 1.35 mach.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (AA). Ammo: 50
  2: Sidewinder missiles (AA). Ammo: 4
  3: Bombs (AS). Ammo: 4
  4: Maverick missiles (AS). speed 1.5 mach, heavy damage. Ammo: 4
  Health: 250
  Armour: 0

Vehicle 3: Stealth Fighter

  This is a flying piece of state of the art technology. Unfortunately, it
can't take as big payload as A-10. While it's a bit easier to fly than the
A-10 plane, it has no afterburner. Instead, the special key opens up weapon
bays to make you able to shoot. When the bays are closed, the plane is
nearly invisible to radars and incoming missiles. This is also indicated
by darker texture, and the targeting box disappears (as you can't shoot).
This plane is ideal against small, important targets (ie. radar bases, or
single buildings). The paveway bomb can be locked to anything you can see,
but it's not very useful against moving targets as it glides so slowly.
However, the enemy gets no "incoming missile" warning from this bomb, and
it's hard to see as it doesn't have a visible glowing rocket engine...
  Speed:
  0.9 mach.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (AA). Ammo: 50
  2: Sidewinder missile (AA). Ammo: 4
  3: Paveway laser guided bomb (AS). Ammo: 4
  4: Maverick missiles (AS). Ammo: 4
  Health: 200
  Armour: 0

Vehicle 4: A-10 Ground attack plane

  This is what the name says. The nightmare of any ground forces, A-10 has
tough armor enough to survive all but the most extreme anti-aircraft fire,
and huge load of hard-hitting weapons. Just the 5-barreled 30mm long range
autocannon with exploding shells is enough for most of the targets. If it's
not, you have all the heavy stuff like hellfires and bombs. It's not really
recommended to try this plane out in deathmatch as it doesn't have dogfight
abilities, but it can take incredible amounts of punishment, and in the
hands of a skillful pilot, the said autocannon tears planes apart...
  Speed:
  0.75 mach, with afterburner: 1.05 mach.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (AA/AS). Ammo: 50
  2: Sidewinder missile (AA). Ammo: 2
  3: Free fall bombs (AS). Heavy damage. Ammo: 6 (spends 2 per 4 bombs)
  4: Maverick missile (AS). Speed 1.5 mach, heavy damage. Ammo: 6
  Health: 350
  Armour: 15
(A-10 model made by Matt "Mix" Fox, skinned by Iikka Ker„nen)

Vehicle 5: X-29 experimental fighter     

  This is something that will make today's dogfight planes obsolote in the
near future. It turns faster than any other plane, and it has some high tech
weaponry. But, since this is an experimental prototype of a future fighter,
it has its flaws. The most important are light weapon load and fragile
electronics that make this plane vulnerable.
  Speed:
  0.9 mach, with afterburner: 1.5 mach.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (AA). Ammo: 100
  2: Plasma cannons (AA). Ammo: 40
  3: Mini missiles (AA/AS). Rapid fire homing rockets. Ammo: 8
  4: Sidewinder missiles (AA). Uses "helm sight". Ammo: 4
  Health: 170
  Armour: 0
(X-29 model made by Matt "Mix" Fox, skin modified by Iikka Ker„nen)

Vehicle 6: Attack Helicopter

  This is a very fast and powerful helicopter, that relies on its huge load
of rockets when fighting against ground targets. It's also capable of self-
defense against fighter planes... not least because of the different way it
moves. You can get into places where jets can't shoot you, and the chopper
turns really fast. Also, the helicopter is ideal for picking up stuff.
  Speed:
  depends on the pitch angle... slow compared to the jet fighters.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (AA). Ammo: 50
  2: 37mm Rockets (AA/AS). Ammo: 16
  3: Sidewinder missile (AA). Ammo: 4
  4: Hellfire missile (AA/AS). Faster than Maverick, less damage. Ammo: 4
  Health: 200
  Armour: 0

Vehicle 7: Mobile SAM vehicle

  Although this vehicle travels at the speed of 200mph in the AirQuake scale,
It doesn't look like that. Basically, it's very slow compared to anything
that flies. However, it has the double-barreled rapid-fire SAM launcher on
its side, and lots of armour. If you run out of missiles, you have an auto-
cannon as a backup weapon. There are a few things you'll learn soon in the
game: First, don't fall from heights! Second, don't shoot down a helicopter
when it's hovering above you! :)  In DM, you have to make good use of the
terrain, keep close to places where you can hopefully hide. If you're caught
in the middle of an open field, you're going to know what "sitting duck"
means.
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (SA/SS). Ammo: 200
  2: SAM missiles (SA/SS). Ammo: 16
  Health: 400
  Armour: 15
Notice that, while you can use the weapons against ground targets, they're
not very powerful. Tanks are better for ground fights.

Vehicle 8: Battle Tank

  This is what many people have asked me to do. It's slow of course, but it
actually does have armour, and very powerful weapons for ground fights. Now
you can do a map completely on ground. :)  This is pretty good against enemy
helicopters too, but there are only a few homing missiles... and since you
can't dodge their rockets, you might want to leave them to others if possible.
Again, make use of the terrain... In Air2, attack from tunnels and behind
corners, so that the enemy looks elsewhere when you shoot your missiles. And
finally, learn to use your Big Gun. Its range is very long, and you can shoot
to/from behind obstacles. (I have even killed planes with it. ;)
  Weapons:
  1: Autocannon (SA/SS). Ammo: 100
  2: Plasma Cannons (SA/SS). Ammo: 30
  3: 110mm Cannons (SS). Ballistic projectiles, extreme damage. Ammo: 60
  4: SAM missile (SA/SS). Ammo: 6
  Health: 600
  Armour: 20

Vehicle 9: Armoured Car

  Yes, it is a Humvee all right. I just don't call it so. :)  This car is
a bit faster than the heavy vehicles, but it has almost no hope in any real
battle. The top-mounted turret is basically there for self defense. Your main
weapons are the mines and the huge bomb. You can kill anything by laying 6
mines together, and adding a bomb next to them... Then wait till somebody
gets too close and BOOM. Of course, if you drop your explosives on open
ground they'll see them and shoot them. In AirCity it's a good idea to place
this stuff behind a corner, so that the enemy can't see it until it's too
late. And yes, one maverick or hellfire kills the car.
  Weapons:
  1: Machine gun (SA/SS). Ammo: 100
  2: Stinger missile (SA). Light, quick missiles. Ammo: 8
  3: Land mines (SS). Ammo: 6
  4: Remote-Controlled Bomb (SS). Ammo: 2. Press fire again to detonate.
  Health: 150
  Armour: 5
Note that mines and remote bombs explode after 2 minutes. This is needed to
reduce the lag. For the same reason I have limited number of mines per player
to 10. Your mine launcher jams when you have 10 mines laying around. You can
use it again when some of your older mines are destroyed.

Vehicle 10: Hovercraft

  I don't know if hovers are used in military anywhere, but I added it as
it's a cool idea and somewhat useful if there's water in the level. It's
a bit like the tank in the way it has mostly ground weapons, and it has
a turret. But it has less armour, and is a LOT faster except when climbing
uphill. (Like real hovers, it sucks on sloped surfaces... Though downhill
is pretty fun)  It also slides quite a bit in turns, and can get over
obstacles on full throttle. (The altitude depends on throttle, shutting down
the engines above water is not recommended :)  Lower throttle to get through
doors, of course...
  Weapons:
  1: Machine gun (SA/SS). Ammo: 100
  2: Plasma cannons (SA/SS). Ammo: 40
  3: Rockets (SA/SS). Ammo: 10
  4: Hellfire missile (SS). Ammo: 6
  Health: 300
  Armour: 10

**CONTACTING

You can send me comments/suggestions to:
ikeranen@raita.oulu.fi
(No bug reports, please. I have beta testers already..)

**CONTRIBUTING

I would like to get other people doing maps and skins. See specs.txt for
more information about these.

Do NOT attach files into email. Instead, ask me first if I need them, or
even better, upload them into the net and tell me the URL.

If I get very good skins and maps (as good/better than mine), they are
likely to be included in release packages of AirQuake in the future.

**PLANS FOR THE FUTURE

For now, I'll keep this patch freeware. Qrally guys did so too!

In single player game, there will be more enemy fighters in the levels.
To compensate the bad AI they have, there will be many of them. :)

QW version will probably never come. QuakeWorld doesn't like flying entities
at all. You know how nails fly in QW when you have lag... The planes would
look the same. Normal Quake is sooo much smoother.

No. There will be no people, no soldiers, no ejected pilots, no bazooka men,
no little quake guys, no no nooaoaaaargh! Just shut up, OK? :-)

**LEGAL STUFF

You may freely distribute AirQuake in non-commercial electronic formats. This
includes public ftp- and www-sites and BBS systems, which don't charge money
for downloading files.

For cover-CD's on computer magazines (or other "free" disks or similar media
that accompanies other products), I require a free copy of the magazine
and the CD to everybody who has contributed to AirQuake.

For other commercial CD's, I require more money than you have. Forget it. :)

AirQuake TC is copyright 1997, Iikka Ker„nen.
Quake is copyright 1996, Id software.
